
Suppose that ¡X take those two conditions and now ask ourselves, does it make sense then to be angry at the fact that we¡¦re going to die? And I suppose the answer is going to be, well, look, who is it, or what is it that you think is the cause of our mortality, or the fact that we only get our 50 or 80 years? Here¡¦s two crude, basic alternatives. You might believe in God, a kind of classic, theistic, conception of God, according to which God is a person who makes decisions about what to do. And God has condemned us to death. That¡¦s what happens in Genesis, God punishes Adam and Eve by making them die. All right, that¡¦s picture number one. Picture number two is you just think there¡¦s this impersonal universe, atoms swirling in the void, coming together in various combinations, but there¡¦s no person behind the scene controlling all of it.

Let¡¦s consider the two possibilities. Possibility number one, God. Well, look, if you¡¦ve got the God view, at least we satisfy the first of our appropriateness conditions. We can say, look; we can say, I¡¦m angry at God for condemning us to a life that¡¦s short, that¡¦s so inadequate, relative to the riches that the world offers us. That¡¦s condition number one. But what about condition number two? Condition number two, after all, requires that God has mistreated us in giving us our 50 or 80 or 100 years. And is that the case? Has God wronged us? Has God treated us in some way that isn¡¦t morally justified? If not, anger at God, resentment of God, wouldn¡¦t make sense.

Suppose your roommate comes into the suite and has a box of candy, and he gives you a piece of candy, and you enjoy it. And he gives you a second piece of candy and you enjoy it. And he gives you a third piece of candy and you enjoy it. And you ask for a fourth piece of candy, and he won¡¦t give it you. Has he wronged you? Has he treated you immorally? Does he owe you more candy? It¡¦s not clear that he or she does. But if not, then being angry ¡X again, I would certainly understand it if you got angry, in the sense that it¡¦s a perfectly common enough response. But is anger an appropriateresponse to your roommate for giving you something, and then not giving you more? It¡¦s not clear that it is an appropriate response. The appropriate response actually seems to me to be, not one of anger, but gratitude. Your roommate didn¡¦t owe you any candy at all, and they gave you four pieces, or whatever it was, the number just was. You might wish you could have more, you might be sad that you can¡¦t have more, but anger doesn¡¦t seem appropriate. God doesn¡¦t, as far as I can see, owe it to us to give us more life than what we get.

Well, suppose we don¡¦t believe in the God theory but the universe theory. Well then, of course ,even condition number one isn¡¦t satisfied. The universe is not a person, is not an agent, has no choice and control. And as such, again, it just seems to me that anger then ¡X I can lift my fist and curse the universe; of course, what I¡¦m doing then is, I¡¦m personifying the universe, treating the universe as though it was a person that deliberately decided to make us die too soon. But however common that response might be, it makes no sense rationally if the universe is not a person. It¡¦s just atoms swirling, forming various kinds of combinations. Anger at the fact that I¡¦m going to die, or die too soon, doesn¡¦t make sense either.

Chapter 6. Sorrow and Preciousness: Other Emotions on Death and Conclusion [00:44:49]
Well, what about sorrow? Maybe I should just be sad at the fact that I¡¦m going to die too soon. And I think some emotion along that line does make sense. The world¡¦s a wonderful place. It would be better to have more of it. I¡¦m sad that I don¡¦t get more, that I¡¦m not going to get more.

But having had that thought, I immediately find myself with another thought. Although it¡¦s a pity I don¡¦t get more, I¡¦m extremely lucky to have gotten as much as I get. The universe is just this swirling mass of atoms, forming clumps of various kinds of things, and dissolving. Most of those atoms don¡¦t get to be alive at all. Most of those atoms don¡¦t get to be a person, falling in love, seeing sunsets, eating ice cream. It¡¦s extraordinarily lucky of us to be in this select, fortunate few.

Let me close then with an expression of this thought. This is from Kurt Vonnegut¡¦s book, Cat¡¦s Cradle. This is a kind of prayer that one of the characters in the novel says ¡X is supposed to say ¡X at the deathbed.

God made mud.
God got lonesome.
So God said to some of the mud, ¡§Sit up.¡¨
¡§See all I¡¦ve made,¡¨ said God. ¡§The hills, the sea, the sky, the stars.¡¨
And I, with some of the mud, had got to sit up and look around.
Lucky me, lucky mud.
I, mud, sat up and saw what a nice job God had done.
Nice going God!
Nobody but you could have done it God! I certainly couldn¡¦t have.
I feel very unimportant compared to You.
The only way I can feel the least bit important is to think of all the mud that didn¡¦t even get to sit up and look around.
I got so much, and most mud got so little.
Thank you for the honor!
Now mud lies down again and goes to sleep.
What memories for mud to have!
What interesting other kinds of sitting-up mud I met!
I loved everything I saw [Vonnegut 1963].

It seems to me that the right emotional response isn¡¦t fear, it isn¡¦t anger, it¡¦s gratitude that we¡¦re able to be alive at all.

[end of transcript]

¡X

References

Vonnegut, Kurt. 1963. Cat¡¦s Cradle.